# 6.x Upgrade Guide

## New packages

There are 3 new packages added in RJSF version 6:

- `@rjsf/daisyui`: This is new theme based on the `daisyui` toolkit
- `@rjsf/react-bootstrap`: This is rename of the `bootstrap-4` theme with an upgrade to the latest version of `react-bootstrap`
- `@rjsf/shadcn`: This is new theme based on the `shadcn` toolkit

## Breaking changes

### Theme removals

The following themes were removed due to duplication of a framework with a newer theme

#### bootstrap-4

The older `bootstrap-4` theme has been removed in favor of the `react-bootstrap` theme

#### fluent-ui

The older `fluent-ui` theme has been removed in favor of the `fluentui-rc` theme

#### material-ui

The older `material-ui` theme has been removed in favor of the `mui` theme

#### @mui version 5

The `mui` theme no longer supports `@mui` version 5 due to the adoption of breaking changes in version 6

### validator-ajv6

This deprecated validator has been removed. Use the `validator-ajv8`.

### Theme version support changes

#### @rjsf/antd

Version 6 is dropping official support for `antd` version 4. You must upgrade to version 5.

#### @rjsf/chakra-ui

Version 6 is dropping official support for `@chakra-ui` version 2. You must upgrade to version 3. We are also requiring
`chakra-react-select` version >=6 as a result.

#### @rjsf/semantic-ui

Version 6 is dropping official support for `semantic-ui-react` version 1. You must upgrade to version 2.

### Node support

Version 6 is dropping official support for Node 14, 16, and 18 as they are no longer [maintained versions](https://nodejs.org/en/about/releases/).
Please use Node 22 when making any changes to `package.json` and `package-lock.json` files.
All PR and branch builds are running against Node 20 and 22.

### React version

RJSF is no longer actively supporting React version < 18.x.
React 18 is officially supported on all the themes.

React 19 support is expected before the end of beta (although several developers have already upgraded with no problems).

### Templates BREAKING CHANGES

#### ArrayFieldTemplateItemType

The type `ArrayFieldTemplateItemType` was deprecated in favor of the `ArrayFieldItemTemplateType` type, which matches the type naming pattern properly.

#### ArrayFieldItemTemplate

The `ArrayFieldItemTemplateType` was refactored to extract the following props into out a new `ArrayFieldItemButtonsTemplateType`:

- `canAdd`: A boolean value stating whether new items can be added to the array.
- `hasCopy`: A boolean value stating whether the array item can be copied.
- `hasMoveDown`: A boolean value stating whether the array item can be moved down.
- `hasMoveUp`: A boolean value stating whether the array item can be moved up.
- `hasRemove`: A boolean value stating whether the array item can be removed.
- `onAddIndexClick: (index) => (event?) => void`: Returns a function that adds a new item at `index`.
- `onDropIndexClick: (index) => (event?) => void`: Returns a function that removes the item at `index`.
- `onReorderClick: (index, newIndex) => (event?) => void`: Returns a function that swaps the items at `index` with `newIndex`.

A new `buttonsProps` prop was added of the type `ArrayFieldItemButtonsTemplateType`

This new type was then used to create a new `ArrayFieldItemButtonsTemplate` in the `Registry.templates`.
See [ArrayFieldItemButtonTemplate](../advanced-customization/custom-templates.md#arrayfielditembuttontemplate)

If you have implemented your own `ArrayFieldItemTemplate` or `ArrayField` then you will have to account for these changes.

#### GridTemplate

A new, theme-dependent template `GridTemplate` was added to support the new layout feature and must be provided if you are building your own `registry.templates` rather than overloading them via the `templates` props.

#### SchemaUtilsType

Five new functions were added to this type, so if you have your own implementation of this type, you will need to add them to yours.
The following new functions match the 5 new validator-based utility API functions mentioned below:

- `findFieldInSchema(path: string | string[], schema: S, formData?: T): FoundFieldType<S>`
- `findSelectedOptionInXxxOf(schema: S, fallbackField: string, xxx: 'anyOf' | `oneOf`, formData?: T): S | undefined;`
- `getFromSchema(schema: S, path: string | string[], defaultValue: T): T;`
- `getFromSchema(schema: S, path: string | string[], defaultValue: S): S;`
- `getFromSchema(schema: S, path: string | string[], defaultValue: T | S): S | T;`

### Removed deprecations

The following deprecations were removed from the code base in v6

#### FormProps.acceptcharset

The `acceptcharset` prop on `Form` was removed. Use the `acceptCharset` prop instead. I.e.:

```tsx
<Form acceptCharset='ISO-8859-1' />
```

#### getMatchingOption()

The `getMatchingOption()` function in `@rjsf/utils` was removed. Use the `getFirstMatchingOption()` function instead.
I.e.:

```ts
import { getFirstMatchingOption, RJSFSchema } from '@rjsf/utils';
import validator from '@rjsf/validator-ajv8';

const schema: RJSFSchema = {
  // your schema goes here
};

const formData = {
  /* your form data goes here */
};
const options: RJSFSchema[] = [
  /* your options extracted from the schema go here */
];

const option = getFirstMatchingOption(validator, formData, options, schema);
```

#### SchemaUtilsType.getMatchingOption()

The `getMatchingOption()` function in the `SchemaUtilsType` was removed. Use the `getFirstMatchingOption()` funciton on
the type instead. I.e.:

```ts
import { createSchemaUtils, RJSFSchema } from '@rjsf/utils';
import validator from '@rjsf/validator-ajv8';

const schema: RJSFSchema = {
  // your schema goes here
};

const formData = {
  /* your form data goes here */
};
const options: RJSFSchema[] = [
  /* your options extracted from the schema go here */
];
const schemaUtils = createSchemaUtils(validator, schema);

const option = schemaUtils.getFirstMatchingOption(formData, options);
```

#### mergeValidationData()

The `mergeValidationData()` function from `@rjsf/utils` was removed. Use the `validationDataMerge()` function instead.
I.e.:

```ts
import { validationDataMerge, ValidationData, ErrorSchema } from '@rjsf/utils';

const validationData: ValidationData = {
  errors: [
    /* Your validation errors go here */
  ],
  errorSchema: {
    /* Your error schema goes here */
  },
};

const additionalErrorSchema: ErrorSchema = {
  /* Your additional error schema goes here */
};

const merged = validationDataMerge(validationData, additionalErrorSchema);
```

#### SchemaUtilsType.mergeValidationData()

The `mergeValidationData()` function in the `SchemaUtilsType` was removed. Use the standalone `validationDataMerge()`
function instead. I.e.:

```ts
import { toErrorList } from '@rjsf/utils';

const validationData: ValidationData = {
  errors: [
    /* Your validation errors go here */
  ],
  errorSchema: {
    /* Your error schema goes here */
  },
};

const additionalErrorSchema: ErrorSchema = {
  /* Your additional error schema goes here */
};

const merged = validationDataMerge(validationData, additionalErrorSchema);
```

#### ValidatorType.toErrorList()

The `toErrorList()` function on the `ValidatorType` interface was removed. Use the standalone `toErrorList()` function
from `@rjsf/utils` instead. I.e.:

```ts
import { validationDataMerge, ErrorSchema, RJSFValidationError, toErrorList } from '@rjsf/utils';

const errorSchema: ErrorSchema = {
  /* Your error schema goes here */
};

const validationErrors: RJSFValidationError[] = toErrorList(errorSchema);
```

#### RJSF_ADDITONAL_PROPERTIES_FLAG

The constant `RJSF_ADDITONAL_PROPERTIES_FLAG` was removed from `@rjsf/utils`. Use the `RJSF_ADDITIONAL_PROPERTIES_FLAG`
constant instead. I.e.:

```ts
import { RJSF_ADDITIONAL_PROPERTIES_FLAG } from '@rjsf/utils';
```

#### UiSchema.classNames

The `classNames` notation on `UiSchema` was removed. Use the `ui:classNames` notation instead. I.e.:

```json
{
  "someField": {
    "ui:classNames": "someCustomClass"
  }
}
```

#### schema.enumNames

The custom `enumNames` property support on a JSON Schema that RJSF invented has been removed. Please use the `UiSchema`
replacement, `ui:enumNames` instead. I.e.:

```ts
import { UiSchema, RJSFSchema } from '@rjsf/utils';

const schema: RJSFSchema = {
  type: 'object',
  properties: {
    attendance: {
      title: 'How did you attend the event?',
      enum: ['person', 'phone', 'video'],
    },
    rating: {
      title: 'How would you rate this event?',
      enum: ['0', '1', '2', '3', '4'],
    },
  },
};

const uiSchema: UiSchema = {
  attendance: {
    'ui:enumNames': ['I joined in person', 'I called in using the phone number', 'I joined using the video link'],
  },
  rating: {
    'ui:enumNames': ["I did't like it", 'It was meh', 'It was ok', 'I liked it', 'I loved it'],
  },
};
```

Use the `ui:enumNames` in the `UiSchema` instead.

### Other BREAKING CHANGES

#### SchemaField removed Bootstrap 3 classes

In fixing [#2280](https://github.com/rjsf-team/react-jsonschema-form/issues/2280), the following `Bootstrap 3` classes
(`form-group`, `has-error` and `has-danger` error classes) were removed from the `classNames` prop passed down to the
`FieldTemplate`. They were instead moved into the `core` theme's `WrapIfAdditionalTemplate` to ensure that theme was
unchanged. As a result, the themes (other than `core`) will no longer render those classes.

If you use a non-`core` theme and were relying on them for in your application's styling or behavior (via css overrides
perhaps), then you can still use the non-`Bootstrap 3` RJSF marker class (see below) or your specific theme's error classes.

#### prefixed RJSF template and field marker classes

Many of the `core` RJSF templates and field implementations that are shared across all themes were updated to add the
`rjsf-` prefix to the marker classes that are being added to the rendered HTML. The following table highlights the old
and new marker classes. If you were relying on any of these classes, simply do a rename:

| old marker class               | new marker class                    |
| ------------------------------ | ----------------------------------- |
| `field`                        | `rjsf-field`                        |
| `field-<schema.type>`          | `rjsf-field-<schema.type>`          |
| `field-array`                  | `rjsf-field-array`                  |
| `field-array-of-<schema.type>` | `rjsf-field-array-of-<schema.type>` |
| `field-array-fixed-items`      | `rjsf-field-array-fixed-items`      |
| `field-error`                  | `rjsf-field-error`                  |
| `field-hidden`                 | `rjsf-field-hidden`                 |
| `array-item`                   | `rjsf-array-item`                   |
| `config-error`                 | `rjsf-config-error`                 |
| `array-item-add`               | `rjsf-array-item-add`               |
| `array-item-copy`              | `rjsf-array-item-copy`              |
| `array-item-move-down`         | `rjsf-array-item-move-down`         |
| `array-item-move-up`           | `rjsf-array-item-move-up`           |
| `array-item-remove`            | `rjsf-array-item-remove`            |
| `object-property-expand`       | `rjsf-object-property-expand`       |
| `object-property-remove`       | `rjsf-object-property-remove`       |

#### optionsList

The generics ordering on the `optionsList()` function was changed from `<S, T, F>` to `<T, S, F>` to be consistent with the rest of the APIs.

## New Features

### New types

The following new types were added to `@rjsf/utils`:

- `ArrayFieldItemTemplateType`: The properties of each element in the ArrayFieldTemplateProps.items array. NOTE: `ArrayFieldTemplateItemType` is an alias to this type
- `FoundFieldType`: The interface for the return value of the `findFieldInSchema` function
- `GridTemplateProps`: The properties that are passed to a `GridTemplate`
- `TestIdShape`: The interface for the test ID proxy objects that are returned by the `getTestId` utility function

### New non-validator utility functions

Three new and three formerly internally private utility functions are available in `@rjsf/utils`:

- `buttonId<T>(id: IdSchema<T> | string, btn: 'add' | 'copy' | 'moveDown' | 'moveUp' | 'remove')`: Generates consistent ids for RJSF buttons
- `getTestIds(): TestIdShape`: Returns an object of test IDs that can only be used in test mode, helpful for writing unit tests for React components
- `hashObject(object: unknown): string`: Stringifies an `object` and returns the hash of the resulting string
- `hashString(string: string): string`: Hashes a string into hex format
- `lookupFromFormContext<T = any, S extends StrictRJSFSchema = RJSFSchema, F extends FormContextType = any>(regOrFc: Registry<T, S, F> | Registry<T, S, F>['formContext'], toLookup: string, fallback?: unknown)`: Given a React JSON Schema Form registry or formContext object, return the value associated with `toLookup`
- `sortedJSONStringify(object: unknown): string`: Stringifies an `object`, sorts object fields in consistent order before stringifying it.

### New validator-based utility functions

Three new validator-based utility functions are available in `@rjsf/utils`:

- `findFieldInSchema<T = undefined, S extends StrictRJSFSchema = RJSFSchema, F extends FormContextType = any>(validator: ValidatorType<T, S, F>, rootSchema: S, path: string | string[], schema: S, formData?: T, experimental_customMergeAllOf?: Experimental_CustomMergeAllOf<S>): FoundFieldType<S>`: Finds the field specified by the `path` within the root or recursed `schema`
- `findSelectedOptionInXxxOf<T = any, S extends StrictRJSFSchema = RJSFSchema, F extends FormContextType = any>(validator: ValidatorType<T, S, F>, rootSchema: S, schema: S, fallbackField: string,xxx: 'anyOf' | 'oneOf', formData?: T, experimental_customMergeAllOf?: Experimental_CustomMergeAllOf<S>): S | undefined`: Finds the option that matches the selector field in the `schema` or undefined if nothing is selected
- `getFromSchema<T = any, S extends StrictRJSFSchema = RJSFSchema, F extends FormContextType = any>(validator: ValidatorType<T, S, F>, rootSchema: S, schema: S, path: string | string[], defaultValue: T | S, experimental_customMergeAllOf?: Experimental_CustomMergeAllOf<S>): T | S`: Helper that acts like lodash's `get` but additionally retrieves `$ref`s as needed to get the path for schemas
