# 3.x Upgrade Guide

## BREAKING

### Bring your own polyfills

core-js@2 has been removed from @rjsf/core. See more about [the rationale here](https://github.com/rjsf-team/react-jsonschema-form/pull/2211#issue-563700810).

If you're using a framework like [Create React App](https://create-react-app.dev/docs/supported-browsers-features#supported-browsers), [Gatsby](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/how-to/custom-configuration/browser-support/), [Next.js](https://nextjs.org/docs/basic-features/supported-browsers-features), or transpiling code through something like `@babel/preset-env`, polyfills are already included there and you won't have to do anything.

If you were directly depending on @rjsf/core's @babel/runtime pulling in core-js@2, just `npm install core-js` and using a side effectful import at the top of your entry point (`import 'core-js'`) might be enough.

For a slightly more elaborate setup, [@babel/preset-env](https://babeljs.io/docs/en/babel-preset-env#how-does-it-work) is probably a good second choice.

From `@babel/preset-env`'s docs

> We leverage [`browserslist`, `compat-table`, and `electron-to-chromium`] to maintain mappings of which version of our supported target environments gained support of a JavaScript syntax or browser feature, as well as a mapping of those syntaxes and features to Babel transform plugins and core-js polyfills.

### Dereferenced schemas for `anyOf`/`allOf` options

`options` prop for `MultiSchemaField` has been changed slightly.

Before an option could include a `$ref`.

Now any option with a reference will be resolved/dereferenced when given as props for `MultiSchemaField`.

### Generate correct ids when arrays are combined with `anyOf`/`oneOf`

In v2, with arrays inside `anyOf` or `oneOf`, the parent name
was not used to generate ids. For example, given a schema such as

```json
{
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "items": {
      "type": "array",
      "items": {
        "type": "object",
        "anyOf": [
          {
            "properties": {
              "foo": {
                "type": "string",
              },
            },
          },
          {
            "properties": {
              "bar": {
                "type": "string",
              },
            },
          },
        ],
      },
    },
  },
}
```

We would get fields with id `root_foo` and `root_bar`. As you can imagine, we
could end up with duplicated ids if there's actually a `foo` or a `bar` in the
root of the schema.

From v3, the child fields will correctly use the parent id when generating
its own id, generating ids such as `root_items_0_foo`.
