# 5.x Upgrade Guide

## Breaking changes

There were several significant **breaking changes** in RJSF version 5 that were necessary in order to support the following new features:

- Schema validation was decoupled from `@rjsf/core` to resolve issue [#2693](https://github.com/rjsf-team/react-jsonschema-form/issues/2693).
  - Additionally, in order to break a circular dependency in the validation refactor, the `@rjsf/core/utils.js` file was split out into its own `@rjsf/utils` package as was suggested in [#1655](https://github.com/rjsf-team/react-jsonschema-form/issues/1655).
- The theme for Material UI version 5 (i.e. `@rjsf/mui`) was split out of the theme for version 4 (i.e. `@rjsf/material-ui`) to resolve the following issues:
  - [#2762](https://github.com/rjsf-team/react-jsonschema-form/issues/2762)
  - [#2858](https://github.com/rjsf-team/react-jsonschema-form/issues/2858)
  - [#2905](https://github.com/rjsf-team/react-jsonschema-form/issues/2905)
  - [#2945](https://github.com/rjsf-team/react-jsonschema-form/issues/2945) 

### React version

RJSF is no longer actively supporting React version < 16.14.x.
React 17 is officially supported on all the themes where the underlying theme library also supports React 17 (only `semantic-ui` is current restricted to React 16).

Unfortunately, there is required work pending to properly support React 18, so use with it at your own risk.

### New packages

There are three new packages added in RJSF version 5:
- `@rjsf/utils`: All of the [utility functions](https://react-jsonschema-form.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api-reference/utiltity-functions) previously imported from `@rjsf/core/utils` as well as the Typescript types for RJSV version 5.
- `@rjsf/validator-ajv6`: The [ajv](https://github.com/ajv-validator/ajv)-v6-based validator refactored out of `@rjsf/core@4.x`, that implements the `ValidatorType` interface defined in `@rjsf/utils`.
- `@rjsf/mui`: Previously `@rjsf/material-ui/v5`, now provided as its own theme.

### `@rjsf/core` BREAKING CHANGES

#### Types
In version 4, RJSF exported all its types directly from `@rjsf/core`.
In version 5, only the types for the `Form` component and the `withTheme()` HOC are exported directly from `@rjsf/core`.
All the rest of the types for RJSF are now exported from the new `@rjsf/utils` package.

NOTE: The types in `@rjsf/utils` have been improved significantly from those in version 4.
Some of the most notable changes are:
- `RJSFSchema` has replaced the use of `JSON7Schema` for future compatibility reasons.
  - Currently `RJSFSchema` is simply an alias to `JSON7Schema` so this change is purely a naming one.
  - It is highly recommended to update your use of `JSON7Schema` with `RJSFSchema` so that when the RJSF begins supporting a newer JSON Schema version out-of-the-box, your code won't be affected. 
- `RJSFSchemaDefinition` has replaced the use of `JSONSchema7Definition` for the same reasons.
- The use of the generic `T` (defaulting to `any`) for the `formData` type has been expanded to cover all type hierarchies that use `formData`.
- A new generic `F` (defaulting to `any`) was added for the `formContext` type, and all types in the hierarchy that use `formContext` have had that generic added to them.
- The new `ValidatorType` and `SchemaUtilsType` interfaces were added to support the decoupling of the validation implementation. 

You can view all these [types](https://github.com/rjsf-team/react-jsonschema-form/blob/rjsf-v5/packages/utils/src/types.ts) on Github.

#### Form props
In version 5, the `Form` component's two optional props `additionalMetaSchemas` and `customFormats` were replaced with the new, required `validator` prop, in order to support the decoupling of the validation implementation.
This new `validator` prop is expected to be an implementation of the `ValidatorType` interface.
The new `@rjsf/validator-ajv6` package contains the refactored implementation of the version 4 validator.

There are two ways to use this new package to provide a `validator` for a `Form`.
First, you can simply import the default validator from the package and pass it to a `Form`.

```tsx
import { RJSFSchema } from "@rjsf/utils";
import Form from "@rjsf/core";
import validator from "@rjsf/validator-ajv6";

// Your schema
const schema: RJSFSchema = { ... };

render((
        <Form schema={schema} validator={validator} />
), document.getElementById("app"));
```

Second, if you were actually providing one (or both) of the removed optional props to your `Form`, you can continue using them by creating a customized validator.

```tsx
import { RJSFSchema } from "@rjsf/utils";
import Form from "@rjsf/core";
import { customizeValidator, CustomValidatorOptionsType } from "@rjsf/validator-ajv6";

// Your schema, additionalMetaSchemas and/or customFormats
const schema: RJSFSchema = { ... };
const additionalMetaSchemas: CustomValidatorOptionsType['additionalMetaSchemas'] = [{ ... }];
const customFormats: CustomValidatorOptionsType['customFormats'] = { ... };

const validator = customizeValidator({ additionalMetaSchemas, customFormats });

render((
        <Form schema={schema} validator={validator} />
), document.getElementById("app"));
```

#### validate renamed
In version 5, the `validate` prop on `Form` was renamed to `customValidate` to avoid confusion with the new `validator` prop. 

#### utils
In version 5, all the utility functions that were previously accessed via `import { utils } from '@rjsf/core';` are now available via `import utils from '@rjsf/utils';`.
Because of the decoupling of validation from `@rjsf/core` there is a breaking change for all the [validator-based utility functions](https://react-jsonschema-form.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api-reference/utiltity-functions#validator-based-utility-functions), since they now require an additional `ValidatorType` parameter.

If you have built custom fields or widgets that utilized any of these breaking-change functions, don't worry, there is a quick and easy solution for you.
The `registry` has a breaking-change which removes the previously deprecated `definitions` property while adding the new `schemaUtils` property.
This new `registry.schemaUtils` property implements the `SchemaUtilsType` interface, which allows you to call a version of each of these breaking-change functions without the need for passing either a `validator` or `rootSchema`.
Because all fields and widgets are guaranteed to be passed the `registry` as a prop, if your custom field/widget happens to use either the `registry.definitions` object or a breaking-change validator-based utility function you make the following changes:

```tsx
import { RJSFSchema, FieldProps } from '@rjsf/utils';

function YourField(props: FieldProps) {
  const { registry } = props;
// Change `registry.definitions` to `registry.rootSchema.definitions`
// const { definitions } = registry; <- version 4
  const { rootSchema } = registry;
  const { definitions } = rootSchema;
  ...
}
```

```tsx
// Change breaking-change function to schemaUtils instead, otherwise import from @rjsf/utils
// import { utils } from '@rjsf/core'; <- version 4
// const { isMultiSelect, retrieveSchema, getUiOptions } = utils; <- version 4
import { RJSFSchema, WidgetProps, getUiOptions } from '@rjsf/utils';

function YourWidget(props: WidgetProps) {
  const { registry, uiSchema } = props;
  const { schemaUtils } = registry;
// const isMultiSelect = isMultiSelect(schema, rootSchema); <- version 4
// const newSchema = retrieveSchema(schema, rootSchema, formData); <- version 4
  const isMultiSelect = schemaUtils.isMultiSelect(schema);
  const newSchema: RJSFSchema = schemaUtils.retrieveSchema(schema, formData);
  const options = getUiOptions(uiSchema);
  
...  
}
```

### `@rjsf/material-ui` BREAKING CHANGES

This theme was simplified back to working only with Material UI version 4 after an unsuccessful attempt to have it fully support both versions 4 and 5 simultaneously.
As a result, the `MuiComponentContext`, `MuiForm5`, `Theme5` components and the `useMuiComponent` hook were removed from the export.
In addition, the `/v4` and `/v5` sub-packages were also removed.

#### Migrating for Material UI version 4
If you were using this theme for Material UI version 4 AND you were using the sub-package, simply remove the `/v4` from your imports.

If you modified your Typescript configuration for the `/v4` sub-package, remove the following from your `tsconfig.json`:

```
{
  ...
  "compilerOptions": {
    ...
    "baseUrl": ".",
    "paths": {
      "@rjsf/material-ui/*": ["node_modules/@rjsf/material-ui/dist/*"]
    }
  }
}
```

If you modified your Jest configuration for the `/v4` sub-package, remove the following from your `jest.config.json`:

```
  "moduleNameMapper": {
    "@rjsf/material-ui/v4": "<rootDir>/node_modules/@rjsf/material-ui/dist/v4.js"
  },
```

#### Migrating for Material UI version 5
If you were using this theme for Material UI version 5, you will want to use `@rjsf/mui` instead.
See below for some before and after examples.

If you modified your Typescript configuration for the `/v5` sub-package, remove the following from your `tsconfig.json`:

```
{
  ...
  "compilerOptions": {
    ...
    "baseUrl": ".",
    "paths": {
      "@rjsf/material-ui/*": ["node_modules/@rjsf/material-ui/dist/*"]
    }
  }
}
```

If you modified your Jest configuration for the `/v5` sub-package, remove the following from your `jest.config.json`:

```
  "moduleNameMapper": {
    "@rjsf/material-ui/v5": "<rootDir>/node_modules/@rjsf/material-ui/dist/v5.js"
  },
```

##### Before
```jsx
import Form5 from '@rjsf/material-ui';
```
 or
```jsx
import Form from '@rjsf/material-ui/v5';
```
 or
```jsx
import { withTheme } from '@rjsf/core';
import Theme from '@rjsf/material-ui/v5';
// Make modifications to the theme with your own fields and widgets
const Form = withTheme(Theme);
```
 or
```jsx
import { withTheme } from '@rjsf/core';
import Theme5 from '@rjsf/material-ui';
// Make modifications to the theme with your own fields and widgets
const Form = withTheme(Theme5);
```

##### After
```jsx
import Form from '@rjsf/mui';
```
or
```jsx
import { withTheme } from '@rjsf/core';
import Theme from '@rjsf/mui';
// Make modifications to the theme with your own fields and widgets
const Form = withTheme(Theme);
```
